# (M1.TD1) Technical Design: Settings Storage API

## Changelog

- 11-03-2024 - 14:37 - @vacmg - Add Settings permissions to the API.
- 21-02-2024 - 02:25 - @vacmg - Change getSettingsTree() to printSettingsTree() in the API & Add new API functions example.
- 20-02-2024 - 13:19 - @vacmg - Add module working mode (Persistent/Volatile) methods & attributes. Improve readability & improve description of initialize(), finalize() & restoreSettings()
- 07-02-2024 - 17:00 - @vacmg - Changed the responsability of restoring default settings from the caller to the initialize function.
- 24-01-2024 - 18:07 - @vacmg - Make restore settings functions definitions more concise.
- 23-01-2024 - 14:50 - @vacmg - Change Macro CONFIG_SETTINGS_DELAYED_WRITE_TIME_MS name.
- 23-01-2024 - 14:18 - @aom20021 - Add restore settings functionality to the API.
- 23-01-2024 - 11:50 - @vacmg - Add changelog section to follow the TD template.
- Not recorded date - @vacmg - Base document.

## Description

This technical design shows the public API used to interact with the settings storage module.

## Module Name: SettingsStorage::Settings

- Action
  - [x] Create
  - [ ] Modify
  - [ ] Delete

## Interface

- Type
  - [x] Class
  - [ ] Test
  - [ ] Config

## Function (Optional)

Store modules configuration in a directory-like structure. A key value pair of \<String, Sublist\> or \<String, Data\>.

## Dependencies (Optional)
- SettingsParser (M1.TD2)
- [Timer](https://espressif-docs.readthedocs-hosted.com/projects/esp-idf/en/latest/api-reference/peripherals/timer.html)
- [fmt library](https://github.com/fmtlib/fmt): string formatter library
- [esp_log.h](https://docs.espressif.com/projects/esp-idf/en/latest/esp32/api-reference/system/log.html): ESP logging libary

## Test Cases (Optional)
None

## Attachments


### Additional info:

This is the technical design of the unique class in the Settings module that is public. All the interactions from outside this module will be used from this class.

### API:

#### Macro **CONFIG_SETTINGS_DISABLE_DELAYED_WRITE**:
- When this macro is true, it will disable the delayed write operations mechanism, by writing instantly to persistent storage after calling putSetting().
- When this macro is undefined or false, this behaviour will be disabled.
- Adding this item will allow to use “CONFIG_SETTINGS_DISABLE_DELAYED_WRITE" as a preprocessor macro to allow or exclude code from being compiled:

    ```
    #if defined(CONFIG_SETTINGS_DISABLE_DELAYED_WRITE)
    ...
    #endif
    ```

#### Macro **CONFIG_SETTINGS_DELAYED_WRITE_TIME_MS**:
- Adding this macro will allow to use "CONFIG_SETTINGS_DELAYED_SAVE_TIME_MS" as a preprocessor macro to be used as symbol in the code with the value of the time to wait when using the delayed save mechanism:

    ```
    timer_set_counter_value(...,CONFIG_SETTINGS_RETARDED_SAVE_TIME_MS);
    ```

#### **public Class Settings** (static)

##### Class that handles all the interaction with Settings module

##### Structs:

- **enum class SettingPermission_t: uint8_t {CLI = 1, GUI = 2};**
  // **Flags enabled** enum that stores each setting visibility permissions.
  - If a bit is set in a flag position, it means that the permision (or visibility) is granted, and if the bit is cleared, the permision is not granted.
  - Permissions can be any OR combination of the flags:
    - Inside a setter function (or inside the SettingValue_t structure), an OR value of CLI | GUI means that this setting is visible in each interface.
    - When using a getter function, an OR value of CLI | GUI means that any setting with either CLI or GUI flags will be listed.

  Outside the declaration of the Settings class, some functions must be declared in the .h to allow flags:
  ```
    Settings::SettingPermission_t operator|(Settings::SettingPermission_t lhs, Settings::SettingPermission_t rhs);

    Settings::SettingPermission_t operator&(Settings::SettingPermission_t lhs, Settings::SettingPermission_t rhs);
    
    const char* settingPermissionToString(Settings::SettingPermission_t permission);
    ```

  With their corresponding definition in the .cpp:
  ```
    Settings::SettingPermission_t operator|(Settings::SettingPermission_t lhs, Settings::SettingPermission_t rhs)
    {
        using SettingPermissionType = std::underlying_type<Settings::SettingPermission_t>::type;
        return Settings::SettingPermission_t(static_cast<SettingPermissionType>(lhs) | static_cast<SettingPermissionType>(rhs));
    }

    Settings::SettingPermission_t operator&(Settings::SettingPermission_t lhs, Settings::SettingPermission_t rhs)
    {
        using SettingPermissionType = std::underlying_type<Settings::SettingPermission_t>::type;
        return Settings::SettingPermission_t(static_cast<SettingPermissionType>(lhs) & static_cast<SettingPermissionType>(rhs));
    }
    
    const char* settingPermissionToString(Settings::SettingPermission_t permission)
    {
        if(permission == Settings::SettingPermission_t::CLI)
        {
            return "CLI      ";
        }
        else if(permission == Settings::SettingPermission_t::GUI)
        {
            return "      GUI";
        }
        else if(permission == (Settings::SettingPermission_t::CLI | Settings::SettingPermission_t::GUI))
        {
            return "CLI | GUI";
        }
        else
        {
            return "   ---   ";
        }
    }
    ```

- **typedef enum  {NO_ERROR = 0, KEY_NOT_FOUND_ERROR, TYPE_MISMATCH_ERROR, KEY_EXISTS_ERROR, CORRUPTED_SETTINGS_FILE_ERROR, MODULE_ALREADY_REGISTERED_ERROR, INVALID_INPUT_ERROR, SETTINGS_NOT_INITIALIZED_ERROR} SettingError_t;**
  // Enum that stores the possible errors returned by the API Settings.

- **typedef enum {VOID = 0, SETTINGS_MAP, FLOAT, INT, STRING} SettingValueType_t;**
  // Enum with the types of data that can be saved.

- **typedef union {float FLOAT; int INT; std::string STRING; std::unordered_map<std::string, struct SettingValue_t>\* SETTING_MAP;} SettingValueData_t;**
  // Union with the types of data that can be saved.

- **typedef struct SettingValue_t {
  SettingValueType_t settingValueType;
  SettingValueData_t settingValueData;
  SettingPermission_t permissions;
  } SettingValue_t;**
  // The value of each SettingsMap_t element

- **typedef std::unordered_map<std::string, SettingValue_t> SettingsMap_t;**
  // The data type that stores a map of key string and struct value with the settings.

  - **SettingValueType_t settingValueType** (VOID/SETTINGS_MAP/FLOAT/INT/STRING)
    // A flag that tells what type of value it stores (in brackets are the possible values)

  - **SettingValueData_t settingValueData**
    // The value itself that is stored.

- **typedef std::vector<std::pair<std::string, SettingValue_t>> SettingsList_t;**
  // The data type used to return items listed inside a SettingsMap_t

- **typedef void (\*RestoreModuleDefaultSettingsCallback_t)(bool generateSettingStructure);**
  // The data type that the settings restore functionality uses. All modules that use settings must register a function of this type where they restore the default settings for the module using putSetting(...) and, if generateSettingStructure is true, they also have to use addSetting(...) prior to putSetting to generate each setting entry.

- **typedef std::unordered_map<std::string, RestoreModuleDefaultSettingsCallback_t> RestoreModuleDefaultSettingsCallbackMap_t;**
  // The data type that stores a map with the function pointers needed to restore each module default settings.

##### Attributes:

- **private SettingsMap_t\* settingsMap**
  // The pointer to the map that stores the settings
  Mutual exclusion must be guaranteed when accessing between reads and writes, and ensure that only one write can be made at a time.

- **private bool initialized**
  // Returns true if init has been called without irrecoverable errors, false otherwise. Any function of this class called when this attribute is false must return false or SETTINGS_NOT_INITIALIZED_ERROR

- **public const SettingValue_t VOID_VALUE** = {.settingValueType = VOID, .settingValueData = 0}
  // There is a special struct that has settingValueType = VOID and settingValueData indeterminate. It is used to indicate that this key is empty.

- **private RestoreModuleDefaultSettingsCallbackMap_t restoreModuleDefaultSettingsCallbackMap**
  // This is the map of functions that restore the default settings of each module.

- **private bool persistentStorageEnabled**
  // This attribute saves the current mode of operation of the module: Normal/Persistent Mode or Failsafe/Volatile Mode.
  - The mode of operation can be downgraded from normal to volatile mode at anytime due to internal or external errors regarding the storage partition filesystem.

##### Methods:

- **public SettingError_t registerModuleRestoreCallback(const std::string& moduleName, RestoreModuleDefaultSettingsCallback_t callback)**
  // This function saves the provided restore function (callback) in a map that matches moduleNames with callbacks (restoreModuleDefaultSettingsCallbackMap).
  The module name is selected from one of **LogUtils.h** module name (COMPONENT_NAME_[MODULE_NAME]) strings.
  - This function works as expected even if initialized is false.
  - If **moduleName** is **nullptr** or **""**, it returns **INVALID_INPUT_ERROR** and the callback is not saved.
  - If **moduleName** is already registered, it returns **MODULE_ALREADY_REGISTERED_ERROR** and the callback is not saved.
  - If **moduleName** is not registered, the callback is saved in **restoreModuleDefaultSettingsCallbackMap** and it returns **NO_ERROR**.

- **public SettingError_t initialize()**
  // Initializes **settingsMap**, gets & validate data from flash and store it in settingsMap using SettingsParser Class.
  - If **persistentStorageEnabled** is **false**, instead of loading the map from the storage, it will **create a new map** with default settings.
  - Returns **NO_ERROR** if the init process is ok, or **CORRUPTED_SETTINGS_FILE_ERROR** if the parser encounters an error.
  - Even though the parser returns `nullptr`, **Settings Storage must work**, so depending on the error reported, the filesystem must be remounted, or a new empty map must be created & saved, or if everything else fails, it should backup to a volatile only mode (where it only saves the configuration in memory, rather than in storage).
  - If **CORRUPTED_SETTINGS_FILE_ERROR** is returned, initialize must restore default settings.
  - **initialized** attribute value **always change to true** after calling this function.
  - Before calling **initialize()**, **registerModuleRestoreCallback()** must be called to get each module's restore function.

- **public void finalize()**
  // This function saves the settingMap to persistent storage, deletes settingsMap object, set initialized to false & persistentStorageEnabled to default.
  - After calling this function, any function of this class called must return **false** or **SETTINGS_NOT_INITIALIZED_ERROR** unless **initialize()** is called again.

- **public bool isPersistentStorageEnabled()**
  // This function returns true if the module mode is set to Normal/Persistent mode, meaning that settings are saved in flash, or false if the module mode is set to volatile mode (config is not persistent between reboots)
  - This function works as expected even if initialized is false.
  -
- **public void disablePersistentStorage()**
  // This function changes the module mode to volatile mode.
  - This function works as expected even if initialized is false.

- **public SettingsList_t listSettings(SettingPermission_t permissions, const std::string& path)**
  // This function returns a list with all the visible settings inside the map pointed by `path` according to the selected permissions.
  - Returns a SettingsList_t with each key & value listed.
  - If the key pointed by `path` is not of the type `SETTINGS_MAP`, it returns a list with the element `key` only.
  - If the `path` does not exist, it returns an empty list.
  - It filters out any setting that does not match the permissions selected. (Check SettingPermission_t definition for more details about what each combination means)

- **public SettingValue_t getSetting(const std::string& path)**
  // Gets a **settingsMap value** (Object in RAM) from a given path (if the entry key is in a submap, its path is separated by the character '/' (/submap/key)).
  - Returns the SettingValue_t object associated with the key pointed by `path`; or the special struct VOID_VALUE if the path is not found; if path points to a map; if path is nullptr or "".
  - **Several reads can be performed concurrently, but none during write**.

- **public SettingError_t putSetting(...)**
  - **SettingError_t putSetting(const std::string& path, int value)**
  - **SettingError_t putSetting(const std::string& path, float value)**
  - **SettingError_t putSetting(const std::string& path, std::string& value)**
    // It updates the value associated to the key pointed by `path` with the value in settingsMap and updates the copy in flash at the moment or in a delayed way (if the entry key is in a submap, its path is separated by the character '/' (/submap/key)).
  - If the **key** pointed by `path` is of a **different type than the existing one, and is different from VOID**, **TYPE_MISMATCH** is returned;
  - If the **key** pointed by `path` is **nullptr or ""**, returns **INVALID_INPUT_ERROR**.
  - If the **key pointed by `path` doesn't exist** in the store, it returns **KEY_NOT_FOUND**.
  - If it terminates correctly, **NO_ERROR** is returned.
  - **It must be guaranteed that only one value can be written at a time, and cannot be written while reading.**
  - The delayed written mechanism works as follows:
    1. When saving a setting with **putSetting()**, a timer is started with a time of **CONFIG_SETTINGS_RETARDED_SAVE_TIME_MS** milliseconds.
    2. When saving another setting with **putSetting()**, the timer is reset to the **CONFIG_SETTINGS_RETARDED_SAVE_TIME_MS** milliseconds value.
    3. When the timer reaches its end, **SettingsParser::writeToFile()** is called to save the settings.

- **public SettingError_t addSetting(SettingPermission_t permissions, const std::string& path)**
  // Creates a new setting with the key value pointed by `path`, and the special struct VOID_VALUE, or if the path points to a submap (ends with '/'), it will create the submap and append it to the key specified. It will also add the permissions of this setting entry.
  (if the key is in a submap, its path is separated by the character '/' (/submap/key)).
  - If the **path** is **nullptr or ""**, returns **INVALID_INPUT_ERROR**.
  - If the **path** is composed of any submap that currently does not exist in the middle of the path (/nonexistant_submap/my_new_map/), it returns **KEY_NOT_FOUND_ERROR**.
  - If the **key pointed by `path` already exists**, returns **KEY_EXISTS**.
  - If successful, **NO_ERROR** is returned.
  - **It must be guaranteed that only one value can be written at a time, and cannot be written while reading.**

- **public SettingError_t restoreSettings(const std::string& moduleName = "")**
  // This function restores the default settings of the provided module, or all settings if moduleName is "" using the callback map "restoreModuleDefaultSettingsCallbackMap".
  The module name is selected from one of LogUtils.h module name (COMPONENT_NAME_[MODULE_NAME]) strings.
  - If **moduleName** = **nullptr** it returns **INVALID_INPUT_ERROR** and performs no operation.
  - If **moduleName** is **not previously registered** using registerModuleRestoreCallback(), it returns **KEY_NOT_FOUND_ERROR** and performs no operation.
  - If **moduleName** is **registered, or is ""**, it will call the corresponding restore settings callbacks and return **NO_ERROR**.
  - After settings restore, it will call **writeSettingsToPersistentStorage()**.

- **public const bool writeSettingsToPersistentStorage()**
  // This function writes the current settingsMap to flash using the SettingsParser class.
  - If **delayed write is enabled**, it will also **cancel the timer** if it is active.
  - If **persistentStorageEnabled** is **false**, it will do nothing and return **false**.

- **public SettingError_t printSettingsTree(FILE\* fp, SettingPermission_t permissions = SettingPermission_t::GUI | SettingPermission_t::CLI, const std::string& path = "")**
  // This prints a formatted string to the specified FILE using fmt library with the subtree that hangs from path (in a recursive way) applying the permisions filter:
  ```
  KEY_STR --- PERMISSIONS
  |-SUBKEY1_STR --- PERMISSIONS --- VALUE1
  |-SUBKEY2_STR --- PERMISSIONS --- VALUE2
  |-SUBMAP_STR --- PERMISSIONS
  | |-SUBKEY3_STR --- PERMISSIONS --- VALUE3
  |-SUBKEY4_STR --- PERMISSIONS --- VALUE4
  ```

  - If key pointed by `path` is not a SETTINGS_MAP entry, it prints only the entry pointed by path (KEY_STR --- PERMISSIONS --- VALUE) and return NO_ERROR.
  - If the path points to a SETTINGS_MAP entry, it prints the whole subtree and return NO_ERROR.
  - If the path is '/', nullptr or '': it prints the complete settings tree and return NO_ERROR.
  - If the path does not exist: it won't print anything and return KEY_NOT_FOUND_ERROR.




##### Example:

    - Example data:
	    Settings are stored in SettingsMap_t as follows:
        - [...] indicate a map.
        - (...) indicates the spacing between each SettingValue_t.
        - (...) indicates a SettingValue_t

        SettingMap_t: [ ('Setting1', 23.56), ('Energy', [ ('MaxVoltage',12), ('SensorName', 'MySensorName') ]) ]

    - Example of API usage:

        int main()
        {
            Settings::registerModuleRestoreCallback(COMPONENT_NAME_STORAGE_PARTITION_MANAGER, StoragePartitionManager::restoreDefaultSettings);
            Settings::registerModuleRestoreCallback(COMPONENT_NAME_WIFI_MANAGER, WifiManager::restoreDefaultSettings);
            if(Settings::init() == Settings::NO_ERROR)
            {
                Settings::addSetting(Settings::SettingPermission_t::CLI | Settings::SettingPermission_t::GUI,"setting1");
                Settings::putSetting("setting1", "value1");
                
                Settings::printSettingsTree(stdout);

                Settings::SettingValue_t res = Settings::getSetting("setting1");
                if(res.settingValueType!=Settings::STRING)
                    return -1;
                const char* string = res.settingValueData.STRING->c_str();
                
                Settings::writeSettingsToPersistentStorage();

                Settings::restoreSettings(COMPONENT_NAME_WIFI_MANAGER);
                if(Settings::isPersistentStorageEnabled())
                {
                    Settings::disablePersistentStorage();
                }
                Settings::finalize();
            }
            return 0;
        }
